 

1. Security Incident Handling & Response:

A security practitioner must be able to handle any imminent threat of current violation of an organization’s security policies or standard security practices. These security incidents could include malware, ransomware, phishing, Advanced Persistent Threats, Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks, and more.

2. SIEM Management:

A security practitioner must be able to manage and analyze the security information and event management (SIEM) tools and services. You will need to be able to create automation with the SIEM and take the real-time analysis produced from alerts and translate that into incident response plans.

3. Audit & Compliance:

A security practitioner must be able to conduct a thorough review of the organization’s adherence to regulation guidelines, such as HIPAA, FISMA, SOX, PCI DSS, GDPR, ISO 27001 and 20000, and COBIT. Security audit and compliance knowledge is very important because any missed area of regulatory compliance could lead to significant fines and penalties for the organization.

4. Analytics & Intelligence:

A security practitioner must be able to leverage analytics and intelligence gathering to identify and detect attacks as quickly as possible. Using analytics and intelligence allows the security practitioner to aggregate network and application data to prevent attacks from occurring in the future.

5. Firewall/IDS/IPS Skills:

A security practitioner must be able to leverage a firewall to filter network traffic and prevent unauthorized access onto the network. In addition, the security expert must have a knowledge of Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS) and Intrusion Prevention Systems (IPS) and know how they relate to the firewall.

6. Intrusion Detection:

A security practitioner must be able to operate the IDS and then identify any suspicious traffic on the network as well as any security policy violations.

7. Application Security Development:

A security practitioner must be able to improve the security of any application by finding, fixing, and preventing its vulnerabilities. In addition, the expert must test and validate during the software development lifecycle (SDLC) so that vulnerabilities are addressed before an application is deployed.

8. Advanced Malware Prevention:

A security practitioner must be able to leverage advanced threat protection software to prevent, detect, and identify Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs) that might circumvent traditional security solutions like anti-virus, firewalls, and IPS/IDS.

9. Mobile Device Management:

A security practitioner must be able to work with the IT department to secure and deploy smartphones, tablets, and laptops as well as understand data loss prevention strategies.

10. Data Management Protection:

A security practitioner must be able to handle, analyze, and securely store all types of data.

11. Digital Forensics:

A security practitioner should understand forensic tools and investigative methods used to find data, anomalies, and malicious activity on the network, in files, or other areas of the business.

12. Identity & Access Management:

A security practitioner needs to understand the best practices for Identity and Access Management (IAM) and ensure that the security policy demonstrates an acceptable use for various roles and responsibilities within the organization.